# Sysmon

Sysmon (System Monitor) is a Windows system service that monitors and logs system activity to the Windows event log. It provides detailed information about process creations, network connections, and changes to file creation times.

Integrating Sysmon with Wazuh is one of the most powerful ways to enhance security visibility on Windows endpoints. It works as follows:

- Collection: The Wazuh agent reads the events generated by Sysmon from the Microsoft-Windows-Sysmon/Operational channel.
- Analysis: Wazuh uses its ruleset (rules and decoders) to parse these detailed events.
- Detection: It enables the detection of complex malicious behaviors—such as process injection, lateral movement, or the use of PowerShell to download malware—which standard Windows logs often overlook.

To implement this new tool, you need to download Sysmon from the official documentation from Microsoft from this [link](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/sysmon). To install Sysmon, you need to open a new Terminal with Administrator privileges and run the following commands in the sysmon directory:

Sysmon64.exe -accepteula -i sysmon-config.xml

With the previous command, we will install sysmon and apply the config defined in sysmon-config.xml

It is very important to note, that the [sysmon xml](https://github.com/swiftonsecurity/sysmon-config) is a powerful way to configure which custom logs are collected from Event Viewer.

Next, you need to configure your agent or group agent to send the logs from Sysmon to [Wazuh](https://wazuh.com/blog/using-wazuh-to-monitor-sysmon-events/). 

<localfile>
<location>Microsoft-Windows-Sysmon/Operational</location>
<log_format>eventchannel</log_format>
<!-- <query>Event[System[(EventID=15)]]</query> If you want only monitor this events -->
</localfile>

After that, you will need to restart the Wazuh agent to apply the changes. If you are using agent groups, the configuration will be pushed automatically, although a restart of the Wazuh agent service might be required to ensure the new settings are active.

At this point, the wazuh agent is sending logs to the Wazuh Manager, and we can create rules to match these events and generate alerts.

In this case, we have configured Event ID 15 in the Sysmon XML to monitor all downloads on the system, identifying the SHA256 hash to review IoCs via VirusTotal. Finally, we added rule 600033 to local_rules.xml to trigger the alert and visualize it on the Wazuh Dashboard.